COPYRIGHT NOTICE

The following copyright notice applies to both the SIMH source and
binary:

Original code published in 1993-2007, written by Robert M Supnik

Copyright (c) 1993-2007, Robert M Supnik

IBM 7010 simulator written by Richard Cornwell

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
\"Software\"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \"AS IS\", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL ROBERT M SUPNIK OR RICHARD CORNWELL BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Except as contained in this notice, the name of Robert M Supnik or
Richard Cornwell shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to
promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior
written authorization from both Robert M Supnik and Richard Cornwell.

Table of Contents

[1. Introduction 3](#introduction)

[2. Simulator Files 3](#simulator-files)

[3. IBM 7010 Features 4](#ibm-7010-features)

[3.1 CPU 5](#cpu)

[3.2 I/O Channels (CH1..CH4) 6](#io-channels-ch1..ch4)

[3.3 Unit record devices. 7](#unit-record-devices.)

[3.3.1 Inquiry Station (INQ) 7](#inquiry-station-inq)

[3.3.2 1402 Card Reader (CDR) 7](#card-reader-cdr)

[3.3.2 1402 Card Punch (CDP) 8](#card-punch-cdp)

[3.3.4 Stack Device (STKR) 9](#stack-device-stkr)

[3.3.5 1403 Line Printer (LP) 9](#line-printer-lp)

[3.4 Magnetic Tape devices 10](#magnetic-tape-devices)

[3.4.1 729 Magnetic Tape (MTA-C) 10](#magnetic-tape-mta-c)

[3.4.2 ChronoClock. 10](#chronoclock.)

[3.5 7909 Devices 10](#devices)

[3.5.1 1301/1302/2302/7320 Disk devices 10](#disk-devices)

[3.5.2 7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)
11](#communications-controller-com-and-coml)

[4 Symbolic Display and Input 12](#symbolic-display-and-input)

[5 Character Codes 14](#character-codes)

1. Introduction
===============

The IBM 1410 and 7010 were designed as enhancements to the IBM 1401,
these were somewhat source compatible, but not binary compatible. The
1410 was introduced on September, 12 1960 and the 7010 in 1962. The 1410
was withdrawn on March 30, 1970. The 7010 featured 4 I/O channels where
the 1410 had 2. Also the 7010 could access 100,000 characters of memory
as opposed to the 80,000 for the 1410. The 7010 also featured optional
decimal floating point instructions. Memory was divided into fields
separated by a special flag called a word mark. Instructions end at the
first character with the word mark set. They consist of a operation
code, followed by 1 or 2 5-digit addresses, and an optional instruction
modifier. If the 10\'s and 100\'s digit have zone bits set the address
is modified by the contents of the five characters at locations 25-100.
Each register is 5 characters long and word marks are ignored. The 1410
and 7010 could also be optionally equipped with priority mode to allow
for device complete interrupts.

The 7010 or 1410 CPU has no registers. All operations on done from
memory.

2. Simulator Files
==================

To compile the IBM 7010:

  -------------------- ---------------- ------------------------------------------
  ***Subdirectory***   ***File***       ***Contains***
  **I7000**            i7000\_defs.h    IBM 7000 simulators general definitions
                       i7010\_defs.h    IBM 7010 simulator specific definitions
                       i7000\_chan.c    Generic channel interface.
                       i7010\_cpu.c     7010 CPU, Channel, interface
                       I7010\_chan.c    7010 Channel.
                       i7010\_sys.c     7010 System interface
                       i7000\_cdr.c     1402 Card reader
                       i7000\_cdp.c     1402 Card punch
                       i7000\_com.c     7750 Communications Controller
                       i7000\_con.c     Inquiry console.
                       i7000\_dsk.c     1301/2302 disk and 7238 drum controller.
                       i7000\_ht.c      7340 Hypertape controller.
                       i7000\_lpr.c     1403 Line printer
                       i7000\_mt.c      729 Tape controller.
                       i7000\_chron.c   Chrono Clock.
  -------------------- ---------------- ------------------------------------------

3. IBM 7010 Features
====================

The IBM 7010 simulator is configured as follows:

  -------------------- -------------------------------------------
  **Device Name(s)**   **Simulates**
  **CPU**              7010 CPU with 10-60K of memory
  **CH1..4**           7010 Channels.
  **MTA**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller (Channel 20)
  **MTB**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller (Channel 21)
  **MTC**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller (Channel 22)
  **CHRON**            Chrono Clock
  **CDR**              1402 Card Reader
  **CDP**              1402 Card Punch
  **STKR**             1402 Card Punch Stacker
  **LP**               1403 Line Printer
  **DK**               1301/2302/7304 disk.
  **COM**              7750 communications controller.
  **COML**             7750 Communications lines.
  -------------------- -------------------------------------------

The 7010 simulator implements several unique stop condition:

-   I/O Device not ready.

-   Unknown CPU instruction

-   I/O Check

-   Divide Error

-   No Word Mark

-   Invalid Addresses

-   Invalid Instruction Length

-   Program Check

-   Protection Check

-   invalid message to 7750

-   No buffer storage available for input character on 7750

-   no buffer storage available for output character on 7750

3.1 CPU
-------

The CPU options include setting memory size and CPU type.

  -------------------- ----------------------
  SET CPU 1401         Emulate a 1401
  SET CPU 7010         Emulate a 7010
  SET CPU 10K          Sets memory to 10K
  SET CPU 20K          Sets memory to 20K
  SET CPU 30K          Sets memory to 30K
  SET CPU 40K          Sets memory to 40K
  SET CPU 50K          Sets memory to 50K
  SET CPU 60K          Sets memory to 60K
  SET CPU 70K          Sets memory to 70K
  SET CPU 80K          Sets memory to 80K
  SET CPU 90K          Sets memory to 90K
  SET CPU 100K         Sets memory to 100K
  SET CPU NOPRIORITY   No Priority Mode
  SET CPU PRIORITY     Priority Mode
  SET CPU NOFLOAT      No Floating Point
  SET CPU FLOAT        Floating point
  SET CPU NOPROT       No memory protection
  SET CPU PROT         Memory Protection
  -------------------- ----------------------

Memory size is 10KW on a standard CPU, extended option must be enabled
to use memory sizes over 10KW.

CPU registers include the visible state of the processor as well as the
control registers for the interrupt system.

  ------------ -------------------- ------------------------------
  ***Name***   ***Size(digits)***   ***Comments***
  IAR          5                    Instruction Address Register
  AAR          5                    A Address Register
  BAR          5                    B Address Register
  CAR          5                    C Address Register
  DAR          5                    D Address Register
  E            5                    Channel 0 Address Register
  F            5                    Channel 1 Address Register
  G            5                    Channel 2 Address Register
  H            5                    Channel 3 Address Register
  ASTRISK      1                    Asterix Mode
  SW0..6       1                    Sense Switch
  SW           6                    Sense Switches.
  ------------ -------------------- ------------------------------

The CPU can maintain a history of the most recently executed
instructions.

This is controlled by the SET CPU HISTORY and SHOW CPU HISTORY commands:

  -------------------- --------------------------------------
  SET CPU HISTORY      clear history buffer
  SET CPU HISTORY=0    disable history
  SET CPU HISTORY=n    enable history, length = n
  SHOW CPU HISTORY     print CPU history
  SHOW CPU HISTORY=n   print first n entries of CPU history
  -------------------- --------------------------------------

The history trace shows the Instruction counter, the AAR and BAR before
and after the instruction executed. The result of the instruction is
displayed followed by the symbolic instruction.

### 3.2 I/O Channels (CH1..CH4)

The 7010 supported 4 channels.

  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  SET CHAN UREC=dev   Sets device to cause interrupts on a channel.
  ------------------- -----------------------------------------------

Channels have the following registers:

  ------------ -------------------- ----------------------
  ***Name***   ***Size(digits)***   ***Comments***
  ADDR         5                    Channel Data Address
  CMD          1                    Channel Command.
  FLAGS        32 (binary)          Channel Flags
  ------------ -------------------- ----------------------

For meaning of bits in FLAGS see i7000\_defs.h.

3.3 Unit record devices.
------------------------

### 3.3.1 Inquiry Station (INQ)

The inquiry station allows for communications with the operating system.
The station is half duplex and will either print or accept input.
Whenever the computer sends a message it is prefixed with a 'R'
character. When the station is ready to receive input it prompts with a
'I'. Input is buffered until the return character is entered. Backspace
will remove the last character typed. An \<esc\> will send an interrupt
to the processor to request it read a record from the console. An
\<esc\> while in input mode will cancel input mode and clear any typed
message.

### 3.3.2 1402 Card Reader (CDR)

The card reader (CDR) reads data from a disk file. Cards are simulated
as ASCII lines with terminating newlines. Card reader files can either
be text (one character per column) or column binary (two characters per
column). The file type can be specified with a set command:

  -------------------------- -------------------------------------
  SET CDR*n* FORMAT=TEXT     Sets ASCII text mode
  SET CDR*n* FORMAT=BINARY   Sets for binary card images.
  SET CDR*n* FORMAT=BCD      Sets for BCD records.
  SET CDR*n* FORMAT=CBN      Sets for column binary BCD records.
  SET CDR*n* FORMAT=AUTO     Automatically determines format.
  -------------------------- -------------------------------------

or in the ATTACH command:

  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  ATTACH CDR*n* *\<file\>*                 Attaches a file
  ATTACH CDR*n* -f *\<format\> \<file\>*   Attaches a file with the given format.
  ATTACH CDR*n* -s \<*file*\>              Added file onto current cards to read.
  ATTACH CDR*n* -e \<*file\>*              After file is read in, the reader will receive and end of file flag.
  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The channel can be changed by the following command:

  --------------------- ---------------------------------
  SET CDR*n* CHAN=*c*   Set this device to channel *c*.
  --------------------- ---------------------------------

The default assignments are:

  ------ -----------
  CDR0   Channel 1
  CDR1   Disabled
  ------ -----------

The card reader can be booted with the:

+-------------+----------------------------------+
| BOOT CDR*n* | Reads first card into address 1. |
|             |                                  |
|             | Starts execution at location 1.  |
+-------------+----------------------------------+

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

end of file out of cards

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 3.3.2 1402 Card Punch (CDP)

The card reader (CDP) writes data to a disk file. Cards are simulated as
ASCII lines with terminating newlines. Card punch files can either be
text (one character per column) or column binary (two characters per
column). The file type can be specified with a set command:

  -------------------------- -------------------------------------
  SET CDP*n* FORMAT=TEXT     Sets ASCII text mode
  SET CDP*n* FORMAT=BINARY   Sets for binary card images.
  SET CDP*n* FORMAT=BCD      Sets for BCD records.
  SET CDP*n* FORMAT=CBN      Sets for column binary BCD records.
  SET CDP*n* FORMAT=AUTO     Automatically determines format.
  -------------------------- -------------------------------------

or in the ATTACH command:

  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  ATTACH CDP*n \<file\>*                   Attaches a file
  ATTACH CDP*n* -f *\<format\> \<file\>*   Attaches a file with the given format.
  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------

The channel can be changed by the following command:

  --------------------- ---------------------------------
  SET CDP*n* CHAN=*c*   Set this device to channel *c*.
  --------------------- ---------------------------------

The default assignments are:

  ------ -----------
  CDP0   Channel 1
  CDP1   Disabled
  ------ -----------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 3.3.4 Stack Device (STKR)

The stacker device can be enabled, and files can be attached to
individual bins of the stacker. The file format follows that of the CDP
device. The individual unit reflects the stacker code sent by the
computer. If no file is attached the output will go to the file attached
to the CDP device.

### 3.3.5 1403 Line Printer (LP)

The line printer (LP) writes data to a disk file as ASCII text with
terminating newlines. Currently set to handle standard signals to
control paper advance.

  ------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------
  SET LP*n* NO/ECHO              Sets echoing to console of line-printer output.
  SET LP*n* CHAN=n               sets channel for this device
  SET LP*n* LINESPERPAGE=*lpp*   Sets number of lines per page on printer.
  ------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------

The default assignments are:

  ----- -----------
  LP0   Channel 1
  LP1   Disabled
  ----- -----------

If the printer supports the following control codes to control spacing.

  ------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Character (Octal)   Action
  060                 Suppress spacing.
  020                 Single space after.
  040                 Single space before.
  063                 Skip to channel 3 (every 5^th^ line)
  062                 Skip to channel 2 (every 8^th^ line)
  061 & 069           Skip to channel 1 (or 9), (top of form).
  ------------------- ------------------------------------------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

3.4 Magnetic Tape devices
-------------------------

### 3.4.1 729 Magnetic Tape (MTA-C)

These come in groups of 10 units each.

Each individual tape drive support several options: MTA used as an
example.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------------
  SET MTA*n* REWIND        Sets the mag tape to the load point.
  SET MTA*n* LOCKED        Sets the mag tape to be read only.
  SET MTA*n* WRITEENABLE   Sets the mag tape to be writable.
  SET MTA*n* LOW           Sets mag tape to low density.
  SET MTA*n* HIGH          Sets mag tape to high density.
  ------------------------ --------------------------------------

Options: Density LOW/HIGH does not change format of how tapes are
written. And is only for informational purposes only.

Tape drives can be booted with:

  ----------- ---------------------------------
  BOOT MTxn   Read in record into location 0.
  ----------- ---------------------------------

### 3.4.2 ChronoClock.

Disabled by default. This is a special 729 tape drive which returns the
current time. It supports the option of setting the channel and drive
that it will occupy. Note: You must disable the real 729 drive that is
is replacing. The clock responds to Read and Backspace commands. A read
results in a 10 character buffer being generated that has the Month,
Day, Hour, Minutes, Seconds and Milliseconds. This time is taken from
the local computer time.

  ------------------ -------------------------------------
  SET CHRON CHAN=n   Set channel for chrono clock.
  SET CHRON UNIT=n   Sets the unit for the chrono clock.
  ------------------ -------------------------------------

Example: To set Chronoclock to unit A9 do the following:

  -------------------------
  SET MTA9 DISABLE
  SET CHRON UNIT=9 CHAN=1
  -------------------------

3.5 7909 Devices
----------------

These devices must be attached to a 7909 channel to work.

### 3.5.1 1301/1302/2302/7320 Disk devices

The 7631 file control supports up to ten devices, which can be 7320
drums, 1301 disks, 1302 disks, or 2302 disks. Unit types are specified
with the SET command.

  ----------------------- ------------------------------------------
  SET DK*n* TYPE=7320     Unit *n* is a drum
  SET DK*n* TYPE=7320-2   Unit *n* is a drum (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1301     Unit *n* is a 1301 disk
  SET DK*n* TYPE=130l-2   Unit *n* is a 1301-2 disk (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1302     Unit *n* is a 1302 disk
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1302-2   Unit *n* is a 1302-2 disk (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=2302     Unit *n* is a 2302 disk
  ----------------------- ------------------------------------------

Units can be SET ENABLED or DISABLED. In addition, units can be set to
enable or disable formatting:

  -------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  SET DK*n* FORMAT     Enable formatting
  SET DK*n* NOFORMAT   Disable formatting
  SET DK*n* HA2        Enable writing of home address 2
  SET DK*n* NOHA2      Disable writing of home address 2
  SET DK*n* MODULE=n   Sets modules for unit, modules can only be even. 0 to 8.
  SET DK*n* CHAN=n     Sets channel for unit (A-H).
  SET DK*n* SELECT=n   Sets select on channel (0 or 1).
  SET DK*n* CTSS       Sets disk to use CTSS bootstrap.
  SET DK*n* IBSYS      Sets disk to use IBSYS bootstrap.
  -------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------

Formatting is disabled by default.

All Disk units support bootstrapping with boot command. Bootstrap code
is build based on whether CPU is in CTSS mode or not.

  ------------ ---------------------------------------------------
  BOOT DK*n*   Insert custom Loader into lower memory and start.
  ------------ ---------------------------------------------------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 3.5.2 7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)

The 7750 is modeled as a terminal multiplexer with 33 lines. It consists
of two device: COM is the multiplexer controller, and COML is the
individual lines. For the first 32 lines, the 7750 performs input and
output through Telnet sessions connected via a user-specified listening
port; the 33rd line is permanently attached to the simulator console
window. The ATTACH command specifies the port to be used for Telnet
sessions:

  --------------------- -----------------------
  ATTACH COM \<port\>   set up listening port
  --------------------- -----------------------

where port is a decimal number between 1 and 65535 that is not being
used other TCP/IP activities.

Each line (each unit of COML) can be set to one of twp modes: KSR-35 and
KSR-37. In KSR-35 mode, lower case input and output characters are
converted automatically to upper case, and parity is ignored. In KSR-37
mode, lower case characters are left alone, and even parity is generated
on input. KSR-37 is the default.

Once COM is attached and the simulator is running, the 7750 listens for
connections on the specified port. It assumes that any incoming
connection is a Telnet connections. The connections remain open until
disconnected either by the Telnet client, a SET COM DISCONNECT
command,or a DETACH COM command.

  ------------------------ ---------------------------------
  SET COM DISCONNECT=*n*   Disconnect line *n*
  SET COM CHAN=*n*         Set channel for com controller.
  ------------------------ ---------------------------------

The 7750 implements the following special SHOW commands

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------
  SHOW COM CONNECTIONS   Displays current connections to the 7750
  SHOW COM STATISTICS    Displays statistics for active connections
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------

The 7750 implements the following special SET commands:

  -------------------------- ------------------------------------
  SET COML*n* LOG=filename   Log output of line n to filename
  SET COML*n* NOLOG          Disable logging and close log file
  SET COML*n* KSR35          Set line *n* to ksr-35
  SET COML*n* KSR37          Set line *n* to ksr-37
  SET COML*n* 2741           Set line *n* to 2741
  -------------------------- ------------------------------------

The controller (COM) implements these registers:

  -------- -------- -------------------------------
  *Name*   *Size*   *Comments*
  ENABLE   1        Enable flag
  STATE    6        Controller state
  MSGNUM   12       Input message sequence number
  -------- -------- -------------------------------

4 Symbolic Display and Input
============================

The IBM 7010 simulator implements symbolic display and input. These are
controlled by the following switches to the EXAMINE and DEPOSIT
commands:

  ---- -------------------------------------
  -m   Display/Enter Symbolic Machine Code
  -c   Display/Enter BCD Characters
  -n   Display 1401 Symbolic Machine Code
       Display/Enter Octal Characters
  ---- -------------------------------------

The symbolic input/display supports several formats for instruction
display:

-   \<opcode\>

-   \<opcode\> \<character\>

-   \<opcode\> \<character\>\<character\>\<character\>

-   \<opcode\> \<address\>

-   \<opcode\> \<address\>,\<address\>

-   \<opcode\> \<address\>,\<character\>

-   \<opcode\> \<address\>,\<address\>,\<character\>

An address is a decimal number optionally followed by a +Xnn specifying
an index register.

5 Character Codes
=================

  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- --------------
  Commercial   Scientific   ASCII   BCD   Card     Remark
                                    00             Blank
  1                         0       01    1        
  2                         0       02    2        
  3                         0       03    3        
  4                         0       04    4        
  5                         0       05    5        
  6                         0       06    6        
  7                         0       07    7        
  8                         0       10    8        
  9                         0       11    9        
  0                         0       12    10       
  \#           =            =       13    3-8      
  @            \'           \'/@    14    4-8      
  :                         :       15    5-8      
  \>                        \>      16    6-8      
  √                         \"      17    7-8      Tape Mark
  ƀ                         \_      20    2-8      
  /                         /       21    10-1     
  S                         S       22    10-1     
  T                         T       23    10-2     
  U                         U       24    10-3     
  V                         V       25    10-4     
  W                         W       26    10-5     
  X                         X       27    10-6     
  Y                         Y       30    10-7     
  Z                         Z       31    10-8     
  \#                        \#      32    10-2-8   Word Mark
  ,                         ,       33    10-3-8   
  \%           (            %/(     34    10-4-8   
  \`                        \`      35    10-5-8   
  \\                        \\      36    10-6-8   
  ⧻                         {       37    10-7-8   Segment Mark
  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- --------------

  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- ------------
  Commercial   Scientific   ASCII   BCD   Card     Remark
  \-                        \-      40    11       also -0
  J                         J       41    11-1     
  K                         K       42    11-2     
  L                         L       43    11-3     
  M                         M       44    11-4     
  N                         N       45    11-5     
  O                         O       46    11-6     
  P                         P       47    11-7     
  Q                         Q       50    11-8     
  R                         R       51    11-9     
  !                         !       52    11-2-8   
  \$                        \$      53    11-3-8   
  \*                        \*      54    11-4-8   
  \]                        \]      55    11-5-8   
  ;                         ;       56    11-6-8   
  △                         \^      57    11-7-8   
  &            \+           &/+     60    12       also +0
  A                         A       61    12-1     
  B                         B       62    12-2     
  C                         C       63    12-3     
  D                         D       64    12-4     
  E                         E       65    12-5     
  F                         F       66    12-6     
  G                         G       67    12-7     
  H                         H       70    12-8     
  I                         I       71    12-9     
  ?                         ?       72    12-2-8   
  .                         .       73    12-3-8   
  ⌑            )            )       74    12-4-8   Lozenge
  \[                        \[      75    12-5-8   
  \<                        \<      76    12-3-8   
  ⧻\*                       \|      77    12-7-8   Group Mark
  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- ------------
