COPYRIGHT NOTICE

The following copyright notice applies to both the SIMH source and
binary:

Original code published in 1993-2007, written by Robert M Supnik

Copyright (c) 1993-2007, Robert M Supnik

IBM 7070 simulator written by Richard Cornwell

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
\"Software\"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \"AS IS\", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL ROBERT M SUPNIK OR RICHARD CORNWELL BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Except as contained in this notice, the name of Robert M Supnik or
Richard Cornwell shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to
promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior
written authorization from both Robert M Supnik and Richard Cornwell.

Table of Contents

[1. Introduction 3](#introduction)

[2. Simulator Files 3](#simulator-files)

[3. IBM 7070 Features 4](#ibm-7070-features)

[3.1 CPU 5](#cpu)

[3.2 I/O Channels (CH0..CH8) 6](#io-channels-ch0..ch8)

[3.3 Unit record devices. 7](#unit-record-devices.)

[3.3.1 7500 Inquiry Station (INQ) 7](#inquiry-station-inq)

[3.3.2 7500 Card Reader (CDR) 7](#card-reader-cdr)

[3.3.3 7550 Card Punch (CDP) 8](#card-punch-cdp)

[3.3.4 7400 Line Printer (LP) 9](#line-printer-lp)

[3.4 Magnetic Tape devices 10](#magnetic-tape-devices)

[3.4.1 729 Magnetic Tape (MTA-C) 10](#magnetic-tape-mta-c)

[3.4.2 ChronoClock. 10](#chronoclock.)

[3.5 7907 Devices 11](#devices)

[3.5.1 1301/1302/2302/7320 Disk devices 11](#disk-devices)

[3.5.2 Hypertape 7340 Tape drive (HTA)
11](#hypertape-7340-tape-drive-hta)

[3.5.3 7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)
12](#communications-controller-com-and-coml)

[4 Symbolic Display and Input 13](#symbolic-display-and-input)

[5 Character Codes 14](#character-codes)

1. Introduction
===============

The IBM 7070 was introduced in June 1960, as a replacement to the IBM
650. It had core memory up to 10,000 10 digit words. The 7072 was
introduced November 1962 and the 7074 on November 1961. The 7074 is a
faster version of the 7070 with the addition of memory up to 40,000 10
digit words. The first 100 memory locations can be used as index
registers. Most memory reference instructions allow for a field of
digits to be selected to operate on and not modify the rest.

The 7070 is a decimal machine with each word consisting of 10 digits
plus a sign. The sign can be plus, minus or alpha. Alpha data is stored
5 characters to a word (2 digits per character).

2. Simulator Files
==================

To compile the IBM 7070, you must define USE\_INT64 as part of the
compilation command line.

  -------------------- ---------------- ------------------------------------------
  ***Subdirectory***   ***File***       ***Contains***
  **I7000**            i7000\_defs.h    IBM 7000 simulators general definitions
                       i7070\_defs.h    IBM 7070 simulator specific definitions
                       i7000\_chan.c    Generic channel interface.
                       i7070\_cpu.c     7070 CPU, Channel, interface
                       i7070\_chan.c    7070 Channel.
                       i7070\_sys.c     7070 System interface
                       i7000\_cdr.c     7500 Card reader
                       i7000\_cdp.c     7550 Card punch
                       i7000\_com.c     7750 Communications Controller
                       i7000\_con.c     7551 Inquiry console.
                       i7000\_dsk.c     1301/2302 disk and 7238 drum controller.
                       i7000\_ht.c      7340 Hypertape controller.
                       i7000\_lpr.c     7400 Line printer
                       i7000\_mt.c      729 Tape controller.
                       i7000\_chron.c   Chrono Clock.
  -------------------- ---------------- ------------------------------------------

3. IBM 7070 Features
====================

The IBM 7070 simulator is configured as follows:

  -------------------- -------------------------------------------
  **Device Name(s)**   **Simulates**
  **CPU**              7070 CPU with 30KW of memory
  **CH0**              Unit record devices
  **CH1..4**           7504 Tape controller channels
  **CH5..7**           7907 Disk, Hypertape, controller channels
  **MTA**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller
  **MTB**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller
  **MTC**              729 Magnetic Tape Controller
  **CHRON**            Chrono Clock
  **HTA**              7340 Hypertape, default not included.
  **HTB**              7340 Hypertape, default not included.
  **CDR**              7500 Card Reader
  **CDP**              7550 Card Punch
  **LP**               7400 Line Printer
  **DK**               1301/2302/7304 disk.
  **INQ**              7551 Inquiry console.
  **COM**              7750 communications controller.
  **COML**             7750 Communications lines.
  -------------------- -------------------------------------------

If desired individual devices can be removed from the system by editing
i7000\_defs.h and changing the number of "NUM\_DEVS\_xxx" entries. The
entry "NUM\_UNITS\_xx" determines the number of individual units for
each controller.

The 7090 simulator implements several unique stop condition:

-   Undefined CPU instruction.

-   IO device not ready.

-   IO Check error.

-   Divide Error

-   Field Overflow (CPU enabled).

-   Sign Change (CPU enabled).

-   Alpha Index Word.

-   Invalid message to 7750.

-   No buffer storage available for input character on 7750.

-   N buffer storage available for output character on 7750.

3.1 CPU
-------

The CPU options include setting memory size and CPU type.

  ------------------ ---------------------------------------
  SET CPU 7070       Sets CPU to emulate 7070.
  SET CPU 7074       Sets CPU to emulate 7074.
  SET CPU 5K         Sets memory to 5K
  SET CPU 10K        Sets memory to 10K
  SET CPU 15K        Sets memory to 15K\*
  SET CPU 20K        Sets memory to 20K\*
  SET CPU 25K        Sets memory to 25K\*
  SET CPU 30K        Sets memory to 30K\*
  SET CPU NOFLOAT    Disables floating point.
  SET CPU FLOAT      Enables floating point.
  SET CPU NOEXTEND   Disables extended memory support.
  SET CPU EXTEND     Enables extended memory support.
  SET CPU TIMER      Enables interval timer and interrupt.
  SET CPU NOTIMER    Disables interval timer.
  ------------------ ---------------------------------------

\* Memory size is 10KW on a standard CPU, extended option must be
enabled to use memory sizes over 10KW.

CPU registers include the visible state of the processor as well as the
control registers for the interrupt system.

  ------------ -------------------- ---------------------
  ***Name***   ***Size(digits)***   ***Comments***
  IC           5                    Program Counter
  AC1          10s                  Accumulator 1
  AC2          10s                  Accumulator 2
  AC3          10s                  Accumulator 3
  IND          10                   Error indcators
  SW1..SW4     1                    Sense Switches 1..4
  SW           4                    Sense Switches
  ------------ -------------------- ---------------------

The CPU can maintain a history of the most recently executed
instructions.

This is controlled by the SET CPU HISTORY and SHOW CPU HISTORY commands:

  -------------------- --------------------------------------
  SET CPU HISTORY      clear history buffer
  SET CPU HISTORY=0    disable history
  SET CPU HISTORY=n    enable history, length = n
  SHOW CPU HISTORY     print CPU history
  SHOW CPU HISTORY=n   print first n entries of CPU history
  -------------------- --------------------------------------

Instruction tracing shows the Instruction counter, the generated
effective address, the value of memory before and after execution of the
instruction and the decoded instruction in symbolic format.

3.2 I/O Channels (CH0..CH8)
---------------------------

The 7070 supports up to 8 channels. Channel models include:

  ------ -------------------------------
  7604   standard multiplexer channel
  7907   advanced capabilities channel
  ------ -------------------------------

Channels are fixed on the 7070.

Channel 0 is a pseudo channel for unit record devices.

Channels have the following registers:

  ------------ -------------------- -------------------------------
  ***Name***   ***Size(digits)***   ***Comments***
  ADDR         6                    Channel data address
  CMD          2                    Channel command (octal)
  LIMIT        6                    Channel word count
  ASM          10s                  Channel assembly register
  LOCATION     6                    Channel location counter
  FLAGS        32                   Channel status flags (binary)
  ------------ -------------------- -------------------------------

For meaning of bits in FLAGS see i7000\_defs.h.

The command:

  --------- -------------------------------------
  SHOW CH   Print summary of devices on channel
  --------- -------------------------------------

3.3 Unit record devices.
------------------------

### 3.3.1 7500 Inquiry Station (INQ)

The inquiry station allows for communications with the operating system.
The station is half duplex and will either print or accept input.
Whenever the computer sends a message it is prefixed with a 'R'
character. When the station is ready to receive input it prompts with a
'I'. Input is buffered until the return character is entered. Backspace
will remove the last character typed. An \<esc\> will send an interrupt
to the processor to request it read a record from the console. An
\<esc\> while in input mode will cancel input mode and clear any typed
message.

### 3.3.2 7500 Card Reader (CDR)

The card reader (CDR) reads data from a disk file. Cards are simulated
as ASCII lines with terminating newlines. Card reader files can either
be text (one character per column) or column binary (two characters per
column). The file type can be specified with a set command:

  ----------------------- -------------------------------------
  SET CDR FORMAT=TEXT     Sets ASCII text mode
  SET CDR FORMAT=BINARY   Sets for binary card images.
  SET CDR FORMAT=BCD      Sets for BCD records.
  SET CDR FORMAT=CBN      Sets for column binary BCD records.
  SET CDR FORMAT=AUTO     Automatically determines format.
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------

or in the ATTACH command:

  ------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  ATTACH CDR *\<file\>*                 Attaches a file
  ATTACH CDR -f *\<format\> \<file\>*   Attaches a file with the given format.
  ATTACH CDR -s \<*file*\>              Added file onto current cards to read.
  ATTACH CDR -e \<*file\>*              After file is read in, the reader will receive and end of file flag.
  ------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The card reader can be booted with the:

  ---------- -------------------------------------
  BOOT CDR   Start card reader to read one card.
  ---------- -------------------------------------

Boot is currently not working.

The 7500 Card reader supported two modes of operation, alpha mode
(default), and load mode in which the card had 5 words that were read
into storage. To enable this set LCOL non zero.

  ---------------- ----------------------------
  SET CDR LCOL=n   Set load column detection.
  ---------------- ----------------------------

If LCOL is set to a non-zero value, then on every card read is checked
to see if there is a 12 punch in the designated column. If so the card
is converted to decimal, every 10^th^ column is used to determine the
sign. Zone 12 is +, Zone 11 is -, no zone is Alpha.

The Card reader could single ready on one of two attention lines. To set
which one receives the ready signal use the following commands:

  ----------------- --------------------------------
  SET CDR NOATTEN   Don't signal when reader done.
  SET CDR ATTENA    Signal on priority channel A.
  SET CDR ATTENB    Signal on priority channel B.
  ----------------- --------------------------------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

end of file out of cards

### 3.3.3 7550 Card Punch (CDP)

The card reader (CDP) writes data to a disk file. Cards are simulated as
ASCII lines with terminating newlines. Card punch files can either be
text (one character per column) or column binary (two characters per
column). The file type can be specified with a set command:

  ----------------------- -------------------------------------
  SET CDP FORMAT=TEXT     Sets ASCII text mode
  SET CDP FORMAT=BINARY   Sets for binary card images.
  SET CDP FORMAT=BCD      Sets for BCD records.
  SET CDP FORMAT=CBN      Sets for column binary BCD records.
  SET CDP FORMAT=AUTO     Automatically determines format.
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------

or in the ATTACH command:

  ----------------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  ATTACH CDP \<file\>                 Attaches a file
  ATTACH CDP -f \<format\> \<file\>   Attaches a file with the given format.
  ----------------------------------- ----------------------------------------

The Card punch could single ready on one of two attention lines. To set
which one receives the ready signal use the following commands:

  ----------------- -------------------------------
  SET CDP NOATTEN   Don't signal when punch done.
  SET CDP ATTENA    Signal on priority channel A.
  SET CDP ATTENB    Signal on priority channel B.
  ----------------- -------------------------------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 3.3.4 7400 Line Printer (LP)

The line printer (LP) writes data to a disk file as ASCII text with
terminating newlines. Currently set to handle standard signals to
control paper advance.

  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  SET LP NO/ECHO              Sets echoing to console of line-printer output.
  SET LP LINESPERPAGE=*lpp*   Sets number of lines per page on printer.
  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------------

The Line printer could single ready on one of two attention lines. To
set which one receives the ready signal use the following commands:

  ---------------- ----------------------------------
  SET LP NOATTEN   Don't signal when printing done.
  SET LP ATTENA    Signal on priority channel A.
  SET LP ATTENB    Signal on priority channel B.
  ---------------- ----------------------------------

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

3.4 Magnetic Tape devices
-------------------------

### 3.4.1 729 Magnetic Tape (MTA-C)

These come in groups of 10 units each.

Each individual tape drive support several options: MTA used as an
example.

  ------------------------ --------------------------------------
  SET MTA*n* REWIND        Sets the mag tape to the load point.
  SET MTA*n* LOCKED        Sets the mag tape to be read only.
  SET MTA*n* WRITEENABLE   Sets the mag tape to be writable.
  SET MTA*n* LOW           Sets mag tape to low density.
  SET MTA*n* HIGH          Sets mag tape to high density.
  ------------------------ --------------------------------------

Options: Density LOW/HIGH does not change format of how tapes are
written. And is only for informational purposes only.

Tape drives can be booted with:

  ----------- ---------------------------------
  BOOT MTxn   Read in record into location 0.
  ----------- ---------------------------------

Channel 1 support the read binary opcode to load binary tapes in octal
format.

### 3.4.2 ChronoClock.

Disabled by default. This is a special 729 tape drive which returns the
current time. It supports the option of setting the channel and drive
that it will occupy. Note: You must disable the real 729 drive that is
is replacing. The clock responds to Read and Backspace commands. A read
results in a 10 character buffer being generated that has the Month,
Day, Hour, Minutes, Seconds and Milliseconds. This time is taken from
the local computer time.

  ------------------ -------------------------------------
  SET CHRON CHAN=n   Set channel for chrono clock.
  SET CHRON UNIT=n   Sets the unit for the chrono clock.
  ------------------ -------------------------------------

Example: To set Chronoclock to unit A9 do the following:

  -------------------------
  SET MTA9 DISABLE
  SET CHRON UNIT=9 CHAN=A
  -------------------------

3.5 7907 Devices
----------------

These devices must be attached to a 7907 channel to work.

### 3.5.1 1301/1302/2302/7320 Disk devices

The 7631 file control supports up to ten devices, which can be 7320
drums, 1301 disks, 1302 disks, or 2302 disks. Unit types are specified
with the SET command.

  ----------------------- ------------------------------------------
  SET DK*n* TYPE=7320     Unit *n* is a drum
  SET DK*n* TYPE=7320-2   Unit *n* is a drum (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1301     Unit *n* is a 1301 disk
  SET DK*n* TYPE=130l-2   Unit *n* is a 1301-2 disk (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1302     Unit *n* is a 1302 disk
  SET DK*n* TYPE=1302-2   Unit *n* is a 1302-2 disk (two modules).
  SET DK*n* TYPE=2302     Unit *n* is a 2302 disk
  ----------------------- ------------------------------------------

Units can be SET ENABLED or DISABLED. In addition, units can be set to
enable or disable formatting:

  -------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  SET DK*n* FORMAT     Enable formatting
  SET DK*n* NOFORMAT   Disable formatting
  SET DK*n* HA2        Enable writing of home address 2
  SET DK*n* NOHA2      Disable writing of home address 2
  SET DK*n* MODULE=n   Sets modules for unit, modules can only be even. 0 to 8.
  SET DK*n* CHAN=n     Sets channel for unit (A-H).
  SET DK*n* SELECT=n   Sets select on channel (0 or 1).
  -------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------

Formatting is disabled by default.

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 3.5.2 Hypertape 7340 Tape drive (HTA)

These come in groups of 10 units each. The controller defines which
channel the devices will be on. By default these devices are not
installed.

  -------------------- ----------------------------------
  SET HTA CHAN=*n*     Sets channel for unit (A-H).
  SET HTA SELECT=*n*   Sets select on channel (0 or 1).
  -------------------- ----------------------------------

Each individual tape drive support several options: HTA used as an
example.

  ------------------------ ------------------------------------
  SET HTA*n* LOCKED        Sets the mag tape to be read only.
  SET HTA*n* WRITEENABLE   Sets the mag tape to be writable.
  ------------------------ ------------------------------------

NOTE: Hypertape drives may not be working correctly since there is very
little documentation available on them.

### 3.5.3 7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)

The 7750 is modeled as a terminal multiplexer with 33 lines. It consists
of two device: COM is the multiplexer controller, and COML is the
individual lines. For the first 32 lines, the 7750 performs input and
output through Telnet sessions connected via a user-specified listening
port; the 33rd line is permanently attached to the simulator console
window. The ATTACH command specifies the port to be used for Telnet
sessions:

  --------------------- -----------------------
  ATTACH COM \<port\>   set up listening port
  --------------------- -----------------------

where port is a decimal number between 1 and 65535 that is not being
used other TCP/IP activities.

Each line (each unit of COML) can be set to one of twp modes: KSR-35 and
KSR-37. In KSR-35 mode, lower case input and output characters are
converted automatically to upper case, and parity is ignored. In KSR-37
mode, lower case characters are left alone, and even parity is generated
on input. KSR-37 is the default.

Once COM is attached and the simulator is running, the 7750 listens for
connections on the specified port. It assumes that any incoming
connection is a Telnet connections. The connections remain open until
disconnected either by the Telnet client, a SET COM DISCONNECT
command,or a DETACH COM command.

  ------------------------ ---------------------------------
  SET COM DISCONNECT=*n*   Disconnect line *n*
  SET COM CHAN=*n*         Set channel for com controller.
  ------------------------ ---------------------------------

The 7750 implements the following special SHOW commands

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------
  SHOW COM CONNECTIONS   Displays current connections to the 7750
  SHOW COM STATISTICS    Displays statistics for active connections
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------

The 7750 implements the following special SET commands:

  -------------------------- ------------------------------------
  SET COML*n* LOG=filename   Log output of line n to filename
  SET COML*n* NOLOG          Disable logging and close log file
  SET COML*n* KSR35          Set line *n* to ksr-35
  SET COML*n* KSR37          Set line *n* to ksr-37
  SET COML*n* 2741           Set line *n* to 2741
  -------------------------- ------------------------------------

The controller (COM) implements these registers:

  -------- -------- -------------------------------
  *Name*   *Size*   *Comments*
  ENABLE   1        Enable flag
  STATE    6        Controller state
  MSGNUM   12       Input message sequence number
  -------- -------- -------------------------------

4 Symbolic Display and Input
============================

The IBM 7070 simulator implements symbolic display and input. Display is
controlled by command line switches:

  ---- -------------------------------------
  -c   Display/Enter as BCD character
  -m   Display/Enter instruction mnemonics
       Display/Enter as decimal numnber.
  ---- -------------------------------------

Instruction input uses standard 7070 assembler syntax.

-   \<opcode\> \<\*\>\<operand\>\<+X\#\>\<(n,m)\>

-   \<opcode\> \<operand\>\<+X\#\>,f2

-   \<opcode\> \<opcode2\>\<operand\>\<+X\#\>

  {#section-1 .list-paragraph}

5 Character Codes
=================

  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- --------------
  Commercial   Scientific   ASCII   BCD   Card     Remark
                                    00             Blank
  1                         0       01    1        
  2                         0       02    2        
  3                         0       03    3        
  4                         0       04    4        
  5                         0       05    5        
  6                         0       06    6        
  7                         0       07    7        
  8                         0       10    8        
  9                         0       11    9        
  0                         0       12    10       
  \#           =            =       13    3-8      
  @            \'           \'/@    14    4-8      
  :                         :       15    5-8      
  \>                        \>      16    6-8      
  √                         \"      17    7-8      Tape Mark
  ƀ                         \_      20    2-8      
  /                         /       21    10-1     
  S                         S       22    10-1     
  T                         T       23    10-2     
  U                         U       24    10-3     
  V                         V       25    10-4     
  W                         W       26    10-5     
  X                         X       27    10-6     
  Y                         Y       30    10-7     
  Z                         Z       31    10-8     
  \#                        \#      32    10-2-8   Word Mark
  ,                         ,       33    10-3-8   
  \%           (            %/(     34    10-4-8   
  \`                        \`      35    10-5-8   
  \\                        \\      36    10-6-8   
  ⧻                         {       37    10-7-8   Segment Mark
  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- --------------

  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- ------------
  Commercial   Scientific   ASCII   BCD   Card     Remark
  \-                        \-      40    11       also -0
  J                         J       41    11-1     
  K                         K       42    11-2     
  L                         L       43    11-3     
  M                         M       44    11-4     
  N                         N       45    11-5     
  O                         O       46    11-6     
  P                         P       47    11-7     
  Q                         Q       50    11-8     
  R                         R       51    11-9     
  !                         !       52    11-2-8   
  \$                        \$      53    11-3-8   
  \*                        \*      54    11-4-8   
  \]                        \]      55    11-5-8   
  ;                         ;       56    11-6-8   
  △                         \^      57    11-7-8   
  &            \+           &/+     60    12       also +0
  A                         A       61    12-1     
  B                         B       62    12-2     
  C                         C       63    12-3     
  D                         D       64    12-4     
  E                         E       65    12-5     
  F                         F       66    12-6     
  G                         G       67    12-7     
  H                         H       70    12-8     
  I                         I       71    12-9     
  ?                         ?       72    12-2-8   
  .                         .       73    12-3-8   
  ⌑            )            )       74    12-4-8   Lozenge
  \[                        \[      75    12-5-8   
  \<                        \<      76    12-3-8   
  ⧻\*                       \|      77    12-7-8   Group Mark
  ------------ ------------ ------- ----- -------- ------------
