**IBM 7090/7094 Simulator Usage**

**01-Dec-2008**

**COPYRIGHT NOTICE**

The following copyright notice applies to the SIMH source, binary, and
documentation:

> Original code published in 1993-2008, written by Robert M Supnik
>
> Copyright (c) 1993-2008, Robert M Supnik
>
> Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
> a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
> \"Software\"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
> without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
> distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
> permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
> the following conditions:
>
> The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
> included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
>
> THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \"AS IS\", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
> EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
> MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
> IN NO EVENT SHALL ROBERT M SUPNIK BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
> OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
> ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
>
> CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
> SOFTWARE.
>
> Except as contained in this notice, the name of Robert M Supnik shall
> not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or
> other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization
> from Robert M Supnik.

[1 Simulator Files 3](#simulator-files)

[2 IBM 7090/7094 Features 3](#ibm-70907094-features)

[2.1 CPU 4](#cpu)

[2.2 Interval Timer (CLK) 5](#interval-timer-clk)

[2.3 I/O Channels (CHANA..CHANH) 5](#io-channels-chana..chanh)

[2.4 Channel A Devices 6](#channel-a-devices)

[2.4.1 711 Card Reader (CDR) 6](#card-reader-cdr)

[2.4.2 721 Card Punch (CDP) 7](#card-punch-cdp)

[2.4.3 716 Line Printer (LPT) 8](#line-printer-lpt)

[2.5 729 Magnetic Tape (MTA...MTH) 9](#magnetic-tape-mtamth)

[2.6 7631 File Control (DSK) 10](#file-control-dsk)

[2.7 7289 High-Speed Drum (DRM) 11](#high-speed-drum-drm)

[2.8 7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)
11](#communications-controller-com-and-coml)

[3 Symbolic Display and Input 13](#symbolic-display-and-input)

[4 Character Sets 13](#character-sets)

This memorandum documents the IBM 7094 simulator.

Simulator Files
===============

To compile the IBM 7094, you must define USE\_INT64 as part of the
compilation

command line.

sim/ scp.h

sim\_console.h

sim\_defs.h

sim\_fio.h

sim\_rev.h

sim\_sock.h

sim\_tape.h

sim\_timer.h

sim\_tmxr.h

scp.c

sim\_console.c

sim\_fio.c

sim\_sock.c

sim\_tape.c

sim\_timer.c

sim\_tmxr.c

sim/i7094/ i7094\_defs.h

i7094\_dat.h

i7094\_cd.c

i7094\_clk.c

i7094\_com.c

i7094\_cpu.c

i7094\_cpu1.c

i7094\_drm.c

i7094\_dsk.c

i7094\_io.c

i7094\_lp.c

i7094\_mt.c

i7094\_sys.c

IBM 7090/7094 Features
======================

The IBM 7090/7094 simulator is configured as follows:

> device name(s) simulates
>
> CPU 7090, 7094, or 7094 with CTSS RPQ\'s CPU with 32KW, 32KW,
>
> or 64KW of memory, respectively
>
> CLK interval timer (RPQ F89349) and Chronolog clock
>
> CHANA 7607 channel (required)
>
> CHANB..CHANH additional 7607, 7289, or 7909 channels
>
> MTA magnetic tape controller, channel A (required)
>
> MTB..MTH additional magnetic tape controllers, channels B to H
>
> CDR 711 card reader
>
> CDP 721 card punch
>
> LPT 716 line printer
>
> DSK 7631 file control with up to 10 modules (disks or drums)
>
> DRM 7289 fast drum control
>
> COM 7750 communications control
>
> COML 7750 communications lines

Channels B through H, the corresponding magnetic tape controllers, and
the file control, drum control, and communications control are initially
set DISABLED. The file control, drum control, and communications control
can be assigned to any channel in the range B through H.

The 7090/7094 simulator implements several unique stop condition:

-   Undefined CPU instruction

-   Undefined channel instruction

-   XEC nesting exceeds limit

-   Divide check on a divide and halt instruction

-   Select of a non-existent channel

-   7607 select of a 7909 channel

-   Write select of a write protected device

-   Invalid file control format

-   Invalid message to 7750

-   No buffer storage available for input character on 7750

-   No buffer storage available for output character on 7750

The LOAD command is not implemented.

CPU
---

The CPU options allow the user to specify a 7090, a 7094, or a 7094 with
CTSS RPQ\'s.

SET CPU 7090 7090

SET CPU 7094 Standard 7094

SET CPU CTSS 7094 with CTSS RPQ\'s.

Memory size is 32KW on a 7090 or 7094 CPU, 64KW on a CTSS CPU. CTSS mode
enables access to the Chronolog clock as magtape unit A7.

CPU registers include the visible state of the processor as well as the
control registers for the interrupt system.

name size comments

PC 15 program counter

AC 38 accumulator

MQ 36 multiplier-quotient

SI 36 storage indicators

KEYS 36 front panel keys

XR1..XR7 15 index registers 1 to 7

\[7090 uses only XR1, XR2, XR4\]

SS1..SS6 1 sense switches 1 to 6

SL1..4 1 sense lights 1 to 4

OVF 1 AC overflow indicator

MQO 1 MQ overflow indicator

DVC 1 divide check indicator

IOC 1 I/O check indicator

TTRAP 1 transfer trap enable

CTRAP 1 copy trap enable

STRAP 1 select trap enable

FTRAP 1 floating point trap enable

STORN 1 storage nullification mode enable

MULTI 1 multiple-tag mode enable

\[always 1 on 7090\]

CHREQ 8 channel request flags

CHTR\_PEND 1 channel trap pending

CHTR\_INHT 1 channel trap inhibit

CHTR\_INHI 1 channel trap instruction inhibit

CHTR\_ENAB 30 channel trap enable flags

USERM 1 user mode flag \[CTSS only\]

IMEM 1 instruction B-core flag \[CTSS only\]

DMEM 1 data B-core flag \[CTSS only\]

RELOC 8 relocation base block \[CTSS only\]

START 8 address start block \[CTSS only\]

LIMIT 8 address limit block \[CTSS only\]

OLDPC 15 PC at start of instruction

PCQ\[0:63\] 15 PC prior to last jump or interrupt;

most recent PC change first

HTPEND 1 halt and transfer pending

HTADDR 15 halt and transfer address

XECMAX 8 XEC chain limit

WRU 8 interrupt character

STOP\_ILL 1 stop on undefined instruction

The CPU can maintain a history of the most recently executed
instructions. This is controlled by the SET CPU HISTORY and SHOW CPU
HISTORY commands:

SET CPU HISTORY clear history buffer

SET CPU HISTORY=0 disable history

SET CPU HISTORY=n enable history, length = n

SHOW CPU HISTORY print CPU history

SHOW CPU HISTORY=n print first n entries of CPU history

If switch -C is set, channel commands are also included in the CPU
history. The maximum length for the history is 262144 entries.

Interval Timer (CLK)
--------------------

The timer (CLK) implements a 60Hz interval timer. It is disabled by
default.

The timer has the following registers:

name size comments

TRAP 1 interval timer trap flag

TIME 24 tick delay

I/O Channels (CHANA..CHANH)
---------------------------

The 709X supports up to 8 channels. Channel models include

7607 standard multiplexer channel

7289 high speed drum channel

7909 advanced capabilities channel

Channel A is required and is always a 7607. Channels B through H are
disabled by default. Channels B through H can be enabled. When a channel
is enabled, the attached device must also be specified:

SET CHANx ENABLED{=\[729\|TAPE\|7289\|DRUM\|7631\|FILE\|7750\|COMM\]}

If no device type is specified, TAPE is assumed.

Setting a channel to 729 (synonym TAPE) defines the channel as a 7607
and enables the corresponding magnetic tape controller. Setting a
channel to 7289 (synonym DRUM) defines the channel as a 7289 and enables
the high-speed drum control. Setting a channel to 7631 defines the
channel as a 7909 and enables the file control. Setting a channel to
7750 (synonym COMM) defines the channel as a 7909 and enables the
communications control. Only one high-speed drum control, one file
control, and one communications control are supported per system.

As an example, the following commands set up the 1971 CTSS
configuration:

SET CPU CTSS

SET CLK ENABLED

SET CHANB ENABLED=TAPE

SET CHANC ENABLED=DISK

SET CHANE ENABLED=COMM

SET CHANG ENABLED=DRUM

Channels have the following registers:

name type size comments

STATE all 8 channel state

DSC 7607,7289 4 data select

DSU 7607,7289 9 data select unit

NDSC 7607,7289 4 non-data select

NDSU 7607,7289 9 non-data select unit

FLAGS all 30 channel flags

IDF all 2 input data flags

OP all 5 channel opcode

CLC all 16 channel location counter

WC all 15 channel word counter

CA all 16 channel current address

AR all 36 channel assembly register

CND 7909 6 channel interrupt conditions

LCC 7909 6 channel control counter

SMS 7909 7 channel options mask

Channel A Devices
-----------------

### 711 Card Reader (CDR)

The card reader (CDR) reads data from a disk file. Cards are simulated
as ASCII lines with terminating newlines. The POS register specifies the
number of the next data item to be read. Thus, by changing POS, the user
can backspace or advance the reader.

Card reader files can either be text (one character per column) or
column binary (two characters per column). The file type can be
specified with a set command:

SET CDR TEXT set text mode

SET CDR BINARY set column binary mode

or in the ATTACH command:

ATT -T CDR \<file\> set text mode

ATT CDR \<file\>.TXT set text mode

ATT -C CDR \<file\> set column binary mode

ATT CDR \<file\>.CBN set column binary mode

The card reader supports the BOOT command. BOOT CDR starts the standard
card reader bootstrap at location 0.

The card reader implements these registers:

name size comments

STATE 2 reader state

BPTR 5 binary buffer pointer

BUF\[0:23\] 36 binary buffer

POS 32 position in the input file

TSTART 24 card start delay

TSTOP 24 card stop delay

TLEFT 24 delay between row halves

TRIGHT 24 delay between rows

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

end of file out of cards

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 721 Card Punch (CDP)

The card reader (CDP) writes data to a disk file. Cards are simulated as
ASCII lines with terminating newlines. The POS register specifies the
number of the next data item to be written. Thus, by changing POS, the
user can backspace or advance the punch.

Card punch files can either be text (one character per column) or column
binary (two characters per column). The file type can be specified with
a set command:

SET CDP TEXT set text mode

SET CDP BINARY set column binary mode

or in the ATTACH command:

ATT -T CDP \<file\> set text mode

ATT CDP \<file\>.TXT set text mode

ATT -C CDR \<file\> set column binary mode

ATT CDP \<file\>.CBN set column binary mode

The card punch supports both the business (1403 print chain A) and
Fortran (1403 print chain H) character sets:

SET CDP BUSINESS business character set

SET CDP FORTRAN Fortran character set

The Fortran character set is the default.

The card punch implements these registers:

name size comments

STATE 2 reader state

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

BPTR 5 binary buffer pointer

BUF\[0:23\] 36 binary buffer

POS 32 position in the output file

TSTART 24 card start delay

TSTOP 24 card stop delay

TLEFT 24 delay between row halves

TRIGHT 24 delay between rows

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

### 716 Line Printer (LPT)

The line printer (LPT) writes data to a disk file as ASCII text with
terminating newlines. The POS register specifies the number of the next
data item to be written. Thus, by changing POS, the user can backspace
or advance the printer.

The line printer implements both 48- and 64-character print chains:

SET LPT 64 64-character print chain

SET LPT 48 48-character print chain

The line printer also implements both the business (1403 print chain A)
and Fortran (1403 H chain) character sets:

SET LPT BUSINESS business print character set

SET LPT FORTRAN Fortran character set

The default is 64 characters, Fortran set.

Finally, because the line printer was used for status output messages,
its output can be redirected to the controlling terminal window if no
file is attached:

SET LPT DEFAULT default output to console window

SET LPT NODEFAULT no default output, error if not attached

The line printer implements these registers:

name size comments

STATE 2 printer state

CMD 2 printer command

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

BPTR 5 binary buffer pointer

BUF\[0:23\] 36 binary buffer

EBUF\[0:22\] 36 echo buffer

POS 32 position in the output file

TSTART 24 line start delay

TSTOP 24 line print delay

TLEFT 24 delay between row halves

TRIGHT 24 delay between rows

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

729 Magnetic Tape (MTA...MTH)
-----------------------------

Every 7607 channel can support up to ten seven-track magnetic tape units
(MTx1...MTx10). Magnetic tape options include the ability to make units
write enabled or write locked.

SET MTn LOCKED set unit n write locked

SET MTn WRITEENABLED set unit n write enabled

Magnetic tape units can be set to a specific reel capacity in MB, or to
unlimited capacity:

SET MTn CAPAC=m set unit n capacity to m MB (0 = unlimited)

SHOW MTn CAPAC show unit n capacity in MB

Units can also be set ENABLED or DISABLED. The magnetic tape simulator
supports the BOOT command. BOOT MTxn starts the standard magnetic tape
load program at location 0.

The magnetic tape controllers implement the following registers:

name size comments

UNIT 5 unit select code

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

BPTR 16 buffer pointer

BLNT 16 buffer length

BUF 7 character buffer (with parity)

TWEF 24 wait time for end of file

TSHORT 24 wait time for "immediate" commands

TSTART 24 wait time for unit start

TSTOP 24 wait time for unit stop

TWORD 24 wait time between word transfers

UST\[1:10\] 5 unit state, drives 1 to 10

POS\[1:10\] 32 position, drives 1 to 10

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

end of file set error indicator

OS I/O error print error message

set error indicator

report error and stop

7631 File Control (DSK)
-----------------------

The 7631 file control supports up to ten devices, which can be 7320
drums, 1301 disks, 1302 disks, or 2302 disks. Unit types are specified
with the SET command. The type can be set only if the unit (and the next
unit in sequence) is unattached, and the unit number is even:

SET DSKn 7320 unit n is a drum (unit n+1 is disabled)

SET DSKn 1301 unit n is a 1301 disk (unit n+1 is the same)

SET DSKn 1302 unit n is a 1302 disk (unit n+1 is the same)

SET DSKn 2302 unit n is a 2302 disk (unit n+1 is the same)

Units can be SET ENABLED or DISABLED. In addition, units can be set to
enable or disable formatting:

SET DSKn FORMAT enable formatting

SET DSKn NOFORMAT disable formatting

Formatting is disabled by default. The current format can be shown with
the command:

SHOW DSKn FORMAT display format information

The 7631 implements the following registers:

name size comments

STATE 6 file control state

ACCESS 1 currently selected access

MODULE 4 currently selected module (0-9)

RECORD 36 record address (6 BCD characters)

MODE 4 disk I/O mode

SENSE 60 sense data (10 BCD characters)

BCDCMD 60 most recent command (10 BCD characters)

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

STOP 1 channel stop flag

FCNTR 13 format track character counter

BUF\[0:999\] 36 track buffer

RBASE 10 offset to record base

RPTR 10 offset to current word

RLIM 10 offset to record end

STIME 24 seek delay

RTIME 24 rotational delay

WTIME 24 inter-word delay

GTIME 24 end-of-sector (gap) delay

CTIME 24 command processing delay

TRACK\[0:19\] 10 current track number

\[0:9\] module n, access 0

\[10:19\] module n, access 1

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

OS I/O error report error and stop

7289 High-Speed Drum (DRM)
--------------------------

The 7289 (also known as the 7320A) high-speed drum was a late addition
to CTSS. Very little is known about the device, other than what is used
in the CTSS sources.

The drum implements these registers:

name size comments

STATE 2 drum state

DA 18 drum address register

OP 1 read/write flag

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

TIME 24 inter-word delay

Error handling is as follows:

error processed as

not attached report error and stop

Drum data files are buffered in memory; therefore, end of file and OS
I/O errors cannot occur.

7750 Communications Controller (COM and COML)
---------------------------------------------

The 7750 is modeled as a terminal multiplexer with 33 lines. It consists
of two devices: COM is the multiplexer controller, and COML is the
individual lines. For the first 32 lines, the 7750 performs input and
output through Telnet sessions connected via a user-specified listening
port; the 33rd line is permanently attached to the simulator console
window. The ATTACH command specifies the port to be used for Telnet
sessions:

ATTACH COM \<port\> set up listening port

where port is a decimal number between 1 and 65535 that is not being
used for other TCP/IP activities.

Each line (each unit of COML) can be set to one of two modes: KSR-35 and
KSR-37. In KSR-35 mode, lower case input and output characters are
converted automatically to upper case, and parity is ignored. In KSR-37
mode, lower case characters are left alone, and even parity is generated
on input. KSR-37 is the default.

Once COM is attached and the simulator is running, the 7750 listens for
connections on the specified port. It assumes that any incoming
connection is a Telnet connection. A connection remains open until
disconnected either by the Telnet client, a SET COM DISCONNECT command,
or a DETACH COM command.

The 7750 implements the following special SHOW commands

SHOW COM CONNECTIONS displays current connections to the 7750

SHOW COM STATISTICS displays statistics for active connections

SHOW COM FREEQ displays the character buffer free list

SHOW COM INPQ displays the character input queue

SHOW COM OUTQ displays the output queues for all lines

SHOW COMn OUTQ displays the output queue for line n

The 7750 implements the following special SET commands:

SET COM DISCONNECT=n disconnect line n

SET COMLn DISCONNECT disconnect line n

SET COMLn LOG=filename log output of line n to filename

SET COMLn NOLOG disable logging and close log file

SET COMLn KSR35 set line n to KSR-35

SET COMLn KSR37 set line n to KSR-37

The controller (COM) implements these registers:

name size comments

ENABLE 1 enable flag

STATE 6 controller state

MSGNUM 12 input message sequence number

CHOB 36 channel output buffer

CHOBV 1 output buffer valid flag

STOP 1 channel stop flag

BUF\[0:119\] 36 channel buffer

BPTR 7 channel buffer pointer

BLIM 7 channel buffer limit

FREEQ\[0:1\] 16 free queue header

INPQ\[0:1\] 16 input queue header

OUTQ\[0:65\] 16 output queue headers, lines 0 to 32

PKTB\[0:32767\] 16 character buffer entries

Queue headers consist of two 16b words; both are subscripts into the
character buffer array. The first word is the buffer subscript for the
queue head; the second is the buffer subscript for the queue tail. In an
empty queue, both words are 0.

Character buffer entries also consist of two 16b words. The first is the
buffer subscript for the next entry in the queue; 0 indicates end of
queue. The second is the data element, typically a 12b character.

The lines (COML) implements these registers:

name size comments

TIME\[0:32\] 24 transmit time, lines 0 to 32

The 7750 does not support save and restore. All open connections, except
the permanent connection to the console window, are lost when the
simulator shuts down or COM is detached.

Symbolic Display and Input
==========================

The IBM 7094 simulator implements symbolic display and input. Display is
controlled by command line switches:

-c display as character

-s display as character string

-m display instruction mnemonics

-i display as 7607 IO instruction

-n display as 7909 IO instruction

Character and string display is further qualified by switches that
specify the character coding and conversion conventions:

-b BCD data (default is nine-code)

-a business character set (default is Fortran)

The default data coding is nine-code, and the default character set is
Fortran. Note that 7094 BCD and IBM 1401 BCD differ in one important
regard: the 7094 interprets 0 as code 20, the 1401 as code 12.

Input parsing is controlled by the first character typed in or by
command line switches:

\' or -c character

\" or -s string

alphabetic instruction mnemonic

numeric octal number

Instruction input uses standard 7094 assembler syntax. There are two
basic instruction classes: memory reference and index reference.

Memory reference instructions have the format

memref{\*} address{,tag}

Index reference instructions have the format

idxref{\*} address,{tag},decrement

Specific instructions may disallow indirect addressing or limit the size
of the tag, address, or decrement fields.

Channel (I/O) instructions have the same basic two formats.

Character Sets
==============

The IBM 7094 uses a 6b character code called 9-code, a variation (with
permuted zones) of the ubiquitous BCD (binary coded decimal). The 7094
also uses BCD for communicating with the card reader/punch and the line
printer. In both 9-code and BCD, some of the characters have no
equivalent in ASCII and require different representations:

9- ASCII IBM 7094 print

code representation character chains

00 0

01 1

02 2

03 3

04 4

05 5

06 6

07 7

10 8

11 9

12 \^

13 \# or = \# in A, = in H

14 @ or \' @ in A, \' in H

15 : blank in A, H 48 char

16 \> blank in A, H 48 char

17 { tape mark blank in A, H 48 char

20 & or + & in A, + in H

21 A

22 B

23 C

24 D

25 E

26 F

27 G

30 H

31 I

32 ?

33 .

34 )

35 \[ blank in A, H 48 char

36 \< blank in A, H 48 char

37 } group mark blank in A, H 48 char

40 -

41 J

42 K

43 L

44 M

45 N

46 O

47 P

50 Q

51 R

52 !

53 \$

54 \*

55 \] blank in A, H 48 char

56 ; blank in A, H 48 char

57 \_ delta blank in A, H 48 char

60 space

61 /

62 S

63 T

64 U

65 V

66 W

67 X

70 Y

71 Z

72 \| record mark

73 ,

74 % or ( % in A, ( in H

75 \~ blank in A, H 48 char

76 \\ blank in A, H 48 char

77 \" blank in A, H 48 char

BCD ASCII IBM 7094 print

code representation character chains

00 space

01 1

02 2

03 3

04 4

05 5

06 6

07 7

10 8

11 9

12 0

13 \# or = \# in A, = in H

14 @ or \' @ in A, \' in H

15 : blank in A, H 48 char

16 \> blank in A, H 48 char

17 { tape mark blank in A, H 48 char

20 \^ blank in A, H 48 char

21 /

22 S

23 T

24 U

25 V

26 W

27 X

30 Y

31 Z

32 \| record mark

33 ,

34 % or ( % in A, ( in H

35 \~ blank in A, H 48 char

36 \\ blank in A, H 48 char

37 \" blank in A, H 48 char

40 -

41 J

42 K

43 L

44 M

45 N

46 O

47 P

50 Q

51 R

52 !

53 \$

54 \*

55 \] blank in A, H 48 char

56 ; delta blank in A, H 48 char

57 \_ blank in A, H 48 char

60 &

61 A

62 B

63 C

64 D

65 E

66 F

67 G

70 H

71 I

72 ?

73 .

74 )

75 \[ blank in A, H 48 char

76 \< blank in A, H 48 char

77 } group mark blank in A, H 48 char
